From Hanselman it's dot com.
It's Hansel minutes, a weekly
discussion with web developer and
technologists. Scott Hanselman hosted by
Carl Franklin. This is Lawrence Ryan announcing
show number one 33. Recorded
live Tuesday, October seven, 2008.
Support for Hanselman. This is
provided by Tellerik rad controls,
the most comprehensive suite of
components for windows forms and
asp.net web applications. online@wwwdottelerik.com. Support
is also provided by dotnet
developers journal. The world's leading.net
developer magazine online at www
dot  dot com. In
this episode, Scott talks to
machine translation with head of
SEO Rivera. Hi, this is
Scott Hanselman, and this is
another episode of Hansel minutes
and I'm sitting in building
99, the fabled building 99
here at Microsoft campus in
Redmond. This is the home
of Microsoft research. This is
an amazing building. Then I'll
have to point you to
pictures online. And I'm sitting
here with a test lead
for machine translation, a healthy
SEO Rivera. I sure appreciate
you taking the time to
sit down and talk to
me, not a problem. So
I added some translation stuff
on my site a while
back, and I know that
people have seen things like
Babblefish for years, but something
that you wrote really caught
my eye and I knew
I had to come and
visit you. And it was
T bot. Is that what
we're calling? I'm calling teapot.
Yeah, that's the name T
bot or a translation bot
for messenger. And so how
does bot work? What is
the experience like for teapot?
T bots is an end
point for messenger that acts
like a human, right? So
for all it matters, a
messenger thinks that it's relative
messages to a human. And
what the bot does basically
is that it sits in
the middle of a conversation
between two humans that don't
speak the same language. So
the assumptions that someone wants
to talk to someone else
that doesn't speak the same
language and therefore he or
she invites T bot to
start a conversation, T bot
will prompt you to select
basically what translation do you
want to perform? And once
you're done with the basic
selection, you can then invite
someone else to join you
in a conference. So whatever
you type is going to
be translated from one language
to the other, and once
your friend on the other
hand type something else, it's
going to reverse the translation.
So it's pretty much acts
like an interpreter in the
middle of a conversation. So
there's three of us in
the conversation. There's me, the
other person. And then teapot
that's right. If they say
hello there that's right. Teapot
bot is going to echo
what they said or whatever.
Let's just imagine that I'm,
I'm, I'm speaking Portuguese, my
native language, and I don't
speak English for, for whatever
reason. So in my case,
I would invite T butts
and say, Hey, T-ball translate
everything from Portuguese to English.
And then I would invite
you. Right? So anything I
type would be translated from
Portuguese to English would show
up in the literal conversation,
Portuguese. Yes you do. Okay.
Which is also something that
helps a lot because machine
translation by nature is not
perfect. So human beings are
able to infer when the
translation is really bad and
understand the differences. So it's
really important to show the
original sentence and the translated
sentence at the same time,
It's like people give machine
translation a hard time. People
just laugh and laugh and
laugh. I've seen people have
a there's the, there's an
old joke from a television
show called news radio. I
don't know how long you've
been in the States, but
the show is called news
radio. I remember. So are
you familiar with super karate
monkey death car? So Jimmy
James, the owner of the
radio station wrote his biography
and had it translated professionally
into Japanese. And then the
Japanese took that translation and
had it translated back into
English and then sold it
and it got completely twisted
around. And one of the
chapters became called super karate
monkey death car. And there's
no idea where that came
from or how it happened,
but that's just one of
those things that happens in
people really enjoy translating things
back and forth. I think
that the naysayers might say,
you know, why bother? We're
just talking pigeon English at
the end, ultimately anyway. Yeah.
I, it's not that bad.
I can definitely tell you
that, you know, it's used
to be really, really bad.
And, and now the new
research on statistical translation definitely
have improved the quality of,
of, of what you get.
Now, there are a couple
of different things that you
have to consider when taking,
you know, when, when talking
about either a chat or
I am conversation, first of
all, there's always retries. So
people can actually try again
if the translated sentence makes
no sense. And another thing
that we have to keep
in mind is that once
you have access to both
the original and the translated,
most of the times you
can infer what the person
was trying to say. Of
course, in my case, I
speak no Japanese. So looking
at the original sentence in
Japanese would make me no
good at all. But at
the same time, there is
a possibility that I can
ask again, I didn't understand.
Could you please read Pete
and not just repeat, but
rephrase Exactly. And people do
that. So one of the
things that I learned in
the very beginning of the
project, while it was still
a prototype, was that people
change the way they type
in others to get better
translations. Yeah, it's funny. I
thought that I was kind
of the only one that
did that because I speak
a couple of languages and
I know, I feel like
I'm gaming the system. Exactly,
Exactly. That's exactly it. So
you start using less slangs.
You try to form sentences
differently in order to get
the best translation because your
goal is actually to communicate,
right. It's not, you know,
to get perfect translation it's
to send your message across.
So you end up adapting
to whatever restriction you have.
So that's specific to either
multilanguage chat rooms or, or
I am conversations right now
with respect to documents. Well,
again, I think that the
Microsoft technology is such that,
yeah, it's not perfect. And
most definitely we need to
improve a lot in several
different aspects. But the fact
that we have something called
the bilingual viewer for document
translation is really, really effective.
So the bilingual viewer interface
is something that presents you
with basically two frames, right?
One with the source document,
the other one with the
target document in translated in
whatever language you select and
allows you to a select
sentences in both frames at
the same time. So there's
highlighting that allows you to
actually position the cursor and
read source and target, and
you have a synchronized trolling.
So you always have your
original page for your reference
and the translated page for
reading. Now, that seems like
that would make sense for
people who speak a little
bit of either language. I
mean, everyone speaks a little
bit of English, right? And
everyone speaks a little bit
of Spanish. I don't know
That that's true, but also
helps with a couple of
very common mistakes that most
of the machine translation systems
make like translating addresses. For
example, that can throw you
completely It'll will build a
whole sentence around on address,
right? Or, you know, whenever
it gets the name wrong,
it tries to translate to
someone name, for example. So
those mistakes are very common
and it's not just particular
to our system. Most of
you know, the, the translation
systems around the are based
on the same, you know,
principals. So they do try
to sometimes translate stuff that
by, by default should not
be translated. So in those
cases have the access to
the source and the target
frames is like essential to
figure out that you should
not bother basically veterans day.
Now you mentioned the innovations
if I understand correctly, statistical
yes. Can you talk a
little bit more about that?
Just a little bit, because
it's not my area of
expertise, but basically you can
think about this new generation
of systems as something that
consumes a bunch of text,
right. Written in, in more
than one language, we call
those parallel texts. So basically
you have a document in
English and a document. We
have the equivalent translation in
Portuguese, you feed the system
with several millions of sentences
like that parallel data, right.
And the system, how to
translate from one language to
the other. So the quality
of your result directly the
pans on the amount of
parallel data you submit to
the system. Now, if you
go back in time, like
I would say five years
ago, the systems were a
little different. You would actually
try to build a grammar
describing how, you know, the
language was put yes, language
wasn't met together. Yes we
did. And now we are
trying to teach the systems
how to actually learn by
themselves. So I think that,
you know, it, it will
drastically improve the overall quality
of, of, of the results
as we move forward. Interesting.
It seems like the data
that humans create is not
pretty. And when someone tries
to create a grammar or
an equation or some kind
of thing, ultimately it comes
down to a well, you
know, it's like capture, right,
exactly. This is the equivalent,
you know, right. To humans
did a lot of work
and we'll let the computer
figure it out, warts, warts,
and all, as we say,
right. Which would be something
I would never feed into
a translator. There you go.
Because it wouldn't just, Yeah.
Yeah. That's, that's actually another
good point because I mean,
one of the problems that
we are, well, at least
trying to solve, not with
the current generation of system,
but, but thinking ahead is
the fact that contextual translation
is heavily based on, well,
your context, right? So if
by any chance you're translating
in document that has a
bunch of insurance, you know,
lingual on it. Well, guess
what, if you applied the
wrong contextual information, you're going
to get a bunch of
nonsense, right. But at the
same time, it's, it's vaguely
possible that we are going
to be able to build
a system so flexible that
will understand every single possible
context. So there are thoughts
around having specialized versions of
translation engines, right? And it's
not a secret that everyone
in the industry thinks about
it. And we haven't figured
out the best way to
implement it yet, but you
know, that's, that's another thing.
That's just the nature of
language. I, I have bad,
bad hands, so I don't
do a lot of typing.
So I use naturally speaking
or voice command. And I
know that like on the
dragon naturally speaking side, they
have the medical dictionary and
the legal dictionary. So their
way of context is you
tell me the words that
you're likely to do. So
over the years, I've had
to build my own dictionary
with words like XML, serializer,
that, you know, the Scott
Hanselman specific grammar, Right. That's,
that's a very similar, you
know, problem that we're trying
to solve up to a
couple of months ago, we
used to have a little
checkbox on our landing page
that would allow people to
actually decide whether the content
that they're trying to translate
is computer related or not.
Right. Because if we could
our own, you know, specific
rules for computer related content,
we would provide better translations.
But that was proved to
be too complicated. And the
average user would not understand
what this little checkbox was
all about. So we are
now back to a generic
domain, you know, solution where
we are pretty much applying
the same rules across the
board for any document that
you sent for translation. Do
you know how to make
the possible out of the
impossible while the dotnet ninjas
at Telerik? Do they just
released a huge pack of
web controls, all built on
top of ESPN at Ajax,
that'll help you build impossibly
fast and interactive applications in
no time at all. They've
made the impossible possible in
desktop development. If you think
you can't have a carousel
component and wind forms, while
you can. They're windows forms,
suite features a super powerful
grid view control, and 32
other crazy desktop components that
will give you a dazzling
WPF like features, but in
wind farms, they do the
same thing in reporting solutions
with a new design surface,
like nothing else looks just
like graph paper, cause you
advanced page layout capabilities makes
it feel more like a
graphic design software than a
reporting solution. Go check them
out@telerikdotcomandbeat.net Ninja. And thanks for
listening. Now, you're the test
lead for machine translation, but
you wrote this, this bot,
this agent that's right. And
did you write this from
scratch or is there an
SDK that, can I write
one of these agents? Yes,
you can. But in terms
of what I did one
year ago, when I started
thinking about the bot, I
did not have access to
the SDK. I didn't actually
know that Microsoft has an
SDK for writing bots called
live agents. Right? So what
I did basically was to
look around for C sharp
based, you know, interfaces. And
I wrote my little prototype
that ran for about one
year based on very low
level protocol handshaking Gene's in
C sharp. So you just
wrote a service that just
talked on one end point.
Yes. Basically, like I said,
the bot pretends to be
a human right for messenger.
So it was a little
program that ran in my
server at home that would
log into the messages server.
Right. And I would just
sit down pretty right. So
whenever people invited for a
conversation would reply, ask for
the languages and would start
providing translations in the middle.
But, you know, once the
prototype proved to be something
useful, it became clear that
there was an opportunity to
build a real product, But
you did this on your
own. Did the bosses immediately
see that this was a
good idea? It took a
while, but finally this last
September, September, I mean, you
know, we're talking February, February, 2008,
I was invited to show
it on the research tech
Fest. And then it got
the momentum and people start,
you know, thinking about putting
a product that actually, you
know, that does the same.
And this product then is
based on a very reliable
infrastructure. Like I said, called
live agents. There's a whole
group supporting the framework. This
product is written in, in
the live agents, scripting language
it's called BuddyScript. Oh, really?
So this isn't like a
file new window service and
then write the whole thing
in C sharp. They do
it all for you. I
mean they have, yeah, they
have a runtime. Basically what
you have to do is,
you know, use their own
scripting language. The runtime will
then on the fly, interpret
this language and start executing
the steps. So it's pretty
cool. And they have a
website that scribes, you know,
how to interact with the
SDK. It's called dev.live.com/agents. And
there's a bunch of documentation
on how to actually write
your own book. So where
does it live? It lived
at your house before, where
is the agent now? And
some data centers supported by
the live agents team. And
it's a real thing. Yeah.
If I was going to
write an agent, let's say,
for example, I get a
lot of people chatting me
and asking for help. Right.
If I was going to
make fake Scott Hanselman, right.
That would just maybe send
them random links or tell
them to go search Google
or leave me alone. I
don't want to help you.
Right. How do I, how
do I do this? I
believe that the right way
to do it would be
to install the SDK, following
the guidelines that they propose
in the documentation. Right. You
can play around with it.
There is a little prototype
module that you can play
around with like using local
host. And once you have
your final version, then you
submit this to their group.
And if they, they want
to publish and, and you
know, there's a whole discussion
on how to do it,
they will get in touch
and COVID, this will be
hosted in the cloud by
them. Yes. So if I
were an ISV that wanted
to provide support or access
to travel information or, or
whatever, I remember years and
years ago, there was an
a bot the very first
part that I ever saw
it's called SmarterChild. Yeah, yeah,
yeah, yeah. I think it
was AOL. And now it's
on live messenger also. Right?
You, you, you probably have
heard about Wilma. Yeah. Yeah.
So that's exactly the same
team that built Wilma. Oh,
wow. So, okay. Pretty cool.
Yeah. This has been a,
along for a long time.
So how do you go
about testing something like machine
translation? I mean, I, you
obviously speak more than one
language. Does that help? Well,
it, it helps understand how
better of a job we
do sometimes. Right? I mean,
yeah. I speak Portuguese and
the little Spanish and try
to speak English most of
the time. So yeah. I
can spot, you know, bad
translations now. And then now
the statistical system is kind
of tricky because actually what
you detect is something that
happened way before. So fed
the system once upon a
time and you generated a
model, you deployed this model
to a test environment and
you start testing this model,
right? So once you detect
a bad translation or something
that is really, really awkward,
it probably means that that
the training process injected something
bad. It doesn't mean that
the model itself is perfect,
but mainly that the training
data that you fed to
the system contains something awkward,
right? So there are basically
two different angles for testing
assistant like that. There is,
of course the basics, you
know, it's a service, it
has to scale. It has
to be reliable. It has
to be accessible, but there's
also the little angle of
language translation quality, which is
really, really complicated. Even though
there are some standard indicators
like the blue scores, which
is a complicated formula for
how to send, you know,
sentences through the system and
try to identify how close
or You actually scored. Yes.
It's part of the nicely
built to generate the blue
scores and make sure that
we are not completely off
in, in one language. Basically
you have, you know, what
to expect from certain languages
and you, I mean, from
certain sentences and you try
to identify how close or,
or, or not close you
are from, from the, And
other, the statistical models are
on a per language pair.
So that's kind of a
cross product of pairs. Yep.
So you would want to
find, you know, maybe a
copy of Anne Boleyn written
in English and French, but
also written in French and
Portuguese and you would have
to compare you'd need actually
six translations to get that
working English, French, French. Now
you'll get how complicated. Right.
So the availability of parallel
data is critical for the
system. Okay. And that's definitely
one of the bottlenecks we
have right now, the, the
backend and the system architecture
itself is quite flexible. I'm
not going to say that,
you know, be naive and
say that once you have
the data, you get the
model the next day, but
definitely having good quantity of
parallel sentences is one of
the biggest bottlenecks that we
have nowadays Now, as, as
test lead, is that something
that's your responsibility to go
looking for or who is
out there looking for the
COVID? Oh, there's a bunch
of people looking, looking for
the right data and also
making sure that we have
the right to actually fetch
and use the data. Right.
Because they're two different things.
I mean, once the data
is available, you have to
make sure that you can
use this data, right. Otherwise,
you know, we're things can
happen. It would seem to
me. And I'm just totally,
I mean, I'm not familiar
with this field, so I'm
brainstorming here, but it seems
to me like the Bible
would probably be a good
place to start in the
sense of it's been translated
typically in any, in any
new language that it's like,
quote unquote discovered whenever the
Western, whenever Western civilization shows
up, the first thing they
do is they try convert
the natives. So they'll write
the Bible in that language.
So that typically represents the
first biggest chunk of text
in a particular language. What
are you using? Religious texts?
I, I honestly, I don't
know. I know that we
have several different segments of
data and there's a fair
amount of educational data, but
I wouldn't know about religion
at this point in time.
Right. Well, I know you
don't have to, I'm not
asking about religion specifically. I'm
just saying that there's a
lot of Bibles that are
in the, in the public
domain. Yeah. I just don't
know. Yeah. Do you get
into kind of a, a
butterfly effect, like you were
talking about how far back,
you know, butterfly flaps, its
wings in Florida and suddenly
there's a hurricane in Rio.
Do you have situations where
you just can't root cause
something or just go back
and you try to fix
it it'll ruin everything else.
Yeah. Yes. So that's, that's
one of the trickiest part
of this whole thing, right?
Because I mean, given that
it's statistical, I mean, how
many sources of the same
bad translation have you had
the chance to feed the
system to get this bad
result going through? So a
good example to that would
be, let's just assume that
in the future, we have
this collaboration system, right. That
allows you and I to
submit corrections to the documents.
We, we, we, we think
are not properly translated. Right.
So, well, I see a
bad Portuguese translation, right? Click
on the sentence. And I
go like, no, this should
be the right translation. Okay.
Well, that's great. Right. But
how can assist them? Trust
me, there's no reputation. Absolutely
no reputation building. So, and
it's really easy. I mean,
you can say, Oh yeah,
if you just get one
feedback about this translation probably
is bad, but he can
totally think about political or
even other intentions. Right. That
would have a group of
people translating or, or correcting
his sentence Purpose. Now I'm
realizing that my question about
religious texts was probably a
stupid one because if ever
there were something that could
be argued well, yeah. It
would be religious translation. It's
one of those things, right?
I mean, you have to
be careful because you have
to build first a very
reliable reputation system to be
able to allow those things,
to, to affect the quality
of your translation Public stuff
now allow you to vote
and have, I don't think
this is right, right. Yes
it does. And you do
take that crowdsourcing that's right,
Right. Yes. It's, it's a
good indication that something is
really bad, but we haven't
developed the reputation system yet
to allow people to actually
enter their corrections. It's something
that, you know, it's, it's
probably going to come in
the near future, but it's,
it's an interesting challenge. Let's
put it this way. It's
not a technical challenge, in
my opinion is more like,
okay, a social and experimental
challenge because you have to
trust humans one way or
the other. And how do
you do that? Well, this,
that, that, that word. I
love that word Outsourcing rather
than outsourcing we're crowdsourcing. Recently
I was on Facebook and
I noticed that Facebook is
trying to translate their site
into every language in the
universe. Just like, just like
Google did, and they're doing
it on a reputation system.
So I went in and
I said, well, I want
to see a Facebook in
Zulu. Right. My wife's language.
So I started translating and
picking different words and, you
know, I know some Zulu.
So I started translating Facebook
into Zulu kind of figure
out what the right Zulu
word for back button was
and all sorts of stuff.
That's cool. And then notice
that that people vote up
or down, but then of
course, do we trust those
votes? Are there real people?
Exactly. You have to follow
that all the way back
and I could have huge
statistical ramifications downstream. Absolutely. And
it's much easier for someone
like me or you to
put together something like that
and go like, Hey, help
me translate that. Actually, I
went through a similar process
when I first wrote my
little prototype because the whole
dialogue in between the bot
and the human that invoked
the translation was based on
some sentences. Right. So I
would have yourself, you would
have to translate those sentences
to be able to, you
know, start a conversation with
someone in Japan. Right. So
I had to go and
crowdsource my first in his
license. And interestingly enough, some,
some people were actually volunteered
through my little blog. Right.
I asked for help and
people volunteered their time and,
and, and answer some translations.
I, I try to double
check if something was really
bad, but you know, it's
worked, but I'm quite sure
that it's one thing to
have a small little pet
project I'm taking this route.
And it's completely different. When
you think about a, a
product from a big company
like Microsoft or Google or
Apple, there's a lot that
may influence that. You know,
it's not necessarily technical Now
right now, messenger doesn't know
about this because it's just
a fake person out there
with, I presume unlimited friends,
right? The live agents framework
takes care of that. Would
you like to see this
kind of pushed into a
messenger itself? Or is that,
is that a goal to
maybe build this into live
messenger so I could click
a button and it would
be a different UI. Love
it. I mean, we should
go talk to those guys.
That would be cool. Absolutely.
I'm one of those guys
that think that, you know,
machine translation is a cool
feature to have in any
product whatsoever. Right. So I'm,
I'm a firm believer again,
that, that broken translation is
way better than no translation
whatsoever. Right. So, and my
example is always the same.
I mean, if I go
to Japan and I'm lost
and I only have my
cell phone, I guess what
I'm going to use T
bot to ask for help.
Right. Have you ever found
yourself that situation yet? Not
yet. I never went to
Japan. You should go somewhere
and just force that to
happen. Yeah. Yeah. But you
know what? My Spanish is
not so good. And sometimes
I, I joke around with,
with, you know, translations to
Spanish and it does pretty
well. Yeah, yeah. Yeah. I
there's a, there's a comedian
named Eddie Izzard who said
that he doesn't speak, he
speaks French, but the joke
was that he's, he learned
French, but he only learned
a few phrases, you know?
And like, one of them
was like, the cat is
under the table. Right. And
the monkey is in the
branch. Right. So, and he's
like, you know, he learns
, but he has nowhere
to use that. So he
goes out into the woods
and he rents a monkey
and he puts it into
the, just waiting for anyone
who speaks French to walk
by so that he could
find the opportunity to use
it. So I feel like
I'm going to go and
hunt for people who don't
speak English so that I
might be able to talk
to them. Yeah, absolutely. And
this whole mobile solution thing
is, is another, you know,
I think good example of
how the technology is, has
a potential to grow. And,
and I'm not specifically talking
about tea bot, but more
like portable translators. Right. You
know, the possibility of translating
a sentence and maybe adding
TTS text to speech to
it. Right. Right. So the
prototype had text to speech
and when we released the
product, we would choose not
to implement it yet, simply
because of some complexities that,
that have to do with,
how do you actually generate
the audio files, but that's,
you know, one of those
things that are go like,
well, yeah, if I have
a little mobile thing and
I can press a button
and it, it speaks something
that I, you know, I
need yeah. I'll try it.
It doesn't really matter if
it's perfect or not. Perfect.
I'm quite sure I will
get what I want. Yeah.
Right. Yeah. The only thing
that's keeping us from that
is, is, is really ubiquitous
wireless, you know, do you
have connectivity when you need
exactly. You need connectivity. Exactly.
Interesting. Well, thank you very
much. I've asked you Roberto,
with test lead for machine
translation and people can check
this out@mtbotathotmail.com. They can add
that to their live messenger.
And then is it translator.live.com?
They can see this that's
right. That's our landing page
for our product. There's a
bunch of information about what
we do. And of course,
there's a couple of interfaces.
Two very interesting translation systems
that we we offer. Well,
there's also a JavaScript that
you can add to your
blog and have a little
combo box that'll automatically translate
your website back and forth.
You can have it all@translator.life.com.
Alright. And that's the, you
know, our, our front end
to what we have been
offering so far, and you
should check it out because
pretty soon you're where you're
going to see some very
interesting offerings. How are you
gonna know when you're done?
We are not going to
be done. Never be done.
No. Fantastic. Alright. This has
been another episode of .